M. Furedi 
(Institute for Transport Sciences, Budapest, Hungary)
"LANGUE"  AND  "PAROLE"   
IN  FREQUENCY  DICTIONARIES
    The author characterizes some earlier lexicographic research 
done in Hungary involving considerable philological efforts and 
sorting machines (later computers), and shows some interesting results 
about unexpected closeness in some characteristics of lexemes (as a 
dictionary) and their usage in real texts. As the late professor 
L.R. Zinder used to tell his students: "We hear what we are used to 
hear". It is important to study the language in its process, in its func-
tioning, as the statistical properties are relevant not only in the charac-
teristics of text, no matter how interpreted, but also on all our psycho-
linguistic behaviour, hearing and composition capabilities, etc. 
    In Hungary one line of the efforts in quantitative linguistics was 
to make "machine-aided" or "computerised" variant of existing 
dictionaries, to reflect some statistical properties of the Hungarian 
"langue".
    One of the first research of this type was F. Papp's a tergo 
dictionary [Papp F. A magyar nyelv szovegmutato szotara [A Reverse-Alphabetized 
Dictionary of the Hungarian Language]. Budapest, 1969.], based on the 58 323 
lexemes of the Hungarian Explanatory Dictionary (HED), compiled in 
the fifties and published between 1959-1962. He and his colleagues 
inserted some new, linguistically relevant codes (so called "Debrecen 
usage") besides those used in the HED, and sorted the dictionary by 
40 different orders, using punch-cards and IBM-type electro-
mechanical sorting machines.
    Another big effort of Hungarian linguists was the preparation of 
a Hungarian Frequency Dictionary [ Furedi M., Kelemen J. A mai magyar 
nyelv szepprozai gyakorisagi szotara (1965 - 1977) [A Hungarian Frequency 
Dictionary of Modern Fiction (1965 - 1977)]. Budapest, 1989. On both dictionaries 
see: Papp F., Furedi M. Применение ЭВМ в изучении лексики венгерского языка // 
Nyelvtudomanyi Kozlemenyek. Vol. 86. 1984. № 2. P. 409-413.] (HFD), initiated 
originally by J. Kelemen in the sixties, the work on which began only 
in 1975, having been revised many times. The undertaking originally 
aimed to reflect the Hungarian linguistic usage, the Hungarian 
"parole", by preparing a five-genre (later only four-genre) frequency 
dictionary, each genre consisting of 500 000 running words following 
the design of frequency dictionaries by A. Juilland and A. Zampolli. 
Detailed manual coding was done by hundreds of university students, 
later controlled by their teachers all over Hungary's universities and 
colleges, everywhere at the chair of Hungarian language. The final, so 
called super-revision was done by linguistic experts at the Research 
Institute for Linguistics (RIL) of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences 
(HAS). This work - due to financial problems at the HAS - was 
completed for only one genre, the fiction. Manual coding (including 
homonymy, part of speech, tense, mood, singular or plural, possessive 
suffix characteristics, collocations etc.) and its systematic controls 
were finished as early as 1976, headed by M. Furedi, then computer 
input and sorting followed with higher level logical controls. All work 
for the fiction was finalised in the middle of 1983, including a rather 
complicated photo type-setting program done by Gy. Visontay and 
M. Furedi in SIMULA'67 programming language at the computer 
centre of the HAS. This was the first Hungarian dictionary prepared 
by real computers (IBM mainframes).
    Reports and partial results were given at conferences in 
Szombathely (Hungary), Eisenstadt, Hamburg, Prague, Syktyvkar, 
Vienna. [Furedi M. A short account on the Frequency Dictionary of Modern 
Hungarian Fiction // COLING'82. Prague, 5-10 July, 1982. P. XXX; Furedi M. A mai 
magyar szepproza statisztikai vizsgalata [Statistical investigation of modern 
Hungarian fiction] // IV International Congress of Hungarian linguists: "A magyar 
nyelv retegzodese". Szombathely, Hungary, 23-26 August, 1983. P. XXX; Furedi M. 
Frequencies of Hungarian affricates // Nyelvtudomanyi Kozlemenyek. Vol. 86. 1984. 
№ 2. P. 337-340; Furedi M.] Among other interesting facts it was shown 
that the distribution of subclasses of Hungarian vowels (velar - 
palatal, labial - illabial, open - closed) show a rather close 
correlation (in some cases even statistically significant one) in a 
dictionary of lexemes and in a dictionary of word-forms weighted 
by frequency.
    The published version of the HFD contains only the most 
frequent 3410 lemmas with all their word-forms occurred in texts, and 
a separate list of those 4898 word-forms, where the modified 
frequency according to Juilland's formula (in our case, as a novelty, 
used within one only genre: the texts were mechanically divided for 5 
subsets of approximately 100 000 running words each), reached 10,00 
or more. In a linguistic corpus of 508 008 Hungarian running 
words, after the exclusion of proper nouns, the number of different 
word-forms found was 91 471 representing 33 169 lemmas. This 
seems to be unexpectedly low, considering an agglutinative language 
with a rather rich suffixation capabilities.
    The mentioned two types of dictionary, each with its own coding 
systems gave a good insight into the linguistic structure of Hungarian 
words, and - at the same time - into the very usage of word-forms of 
an agglutinative language. The post-life of both dictionaries was (and 
still is) promising, due to successful coincidence of several rather 
strange and unexpected anecdotical events. The lemmas of both 
dictionaries were united into one huge data-base, and, parallelly, a 
special linguistics-oriented data-base handling system was elaborated 
by L. Elteto [Elteto L. Uj adatbaziskezelo rendszer VM/CMS alatt [A new data-
base handling system under VM/CMS] // Informacio - Elektronika, 1985. P. XXX.] 
on the (then new) IBM 3031 computer of the HAS, as early as in 
1984-1985. A new field of CV-structure was also introduced into the 
lexeme data-base by A. Kornai [Kornai A. Szotari adatbazis az akademiai 
nagyszamitogepen [A dictionary data-base on the mainframe computer of the 
Academy] // Muhelymunkak a nyelveszet es tarstudomanyai korebol. II. - Budapest: 
MTA Nyelvtudomanyi Intezete, 1986. junius.] in 1985. The resulting 
SZOTA1R data-base consists now of about 80 000 Hungarian 
lemmas, and since that time it has been used at the RIL and by many 
linguists worldwide. This united Hungarian database can be accessed 
for research purposes, free of charge. As far as both dictionaries on 
their own had been declared public domain early enough, they could 
have also been incorporated into the Hungarian spelling checker 
programs, like that one sold by the Hungarian firm Morphologic for 
such program packages as different versions of InDesign, PageMaker, 
QuarkXpress and, naturally, the widespread versions of MS Office 95-
2002.
    There are some other dictionaries worth mentioning, like some 
Hungarian poets' dictionaries (S. Petofi, Gy. Juhasz), a newspaper and 
magazine frequency dictionary based on texts oriented for children 
and young people, lemmatised "on the fly" by only one person 
(Szeged, 1986), and last, but not least the Hungarian Academic 
Dictionary (HAD) under preparation at the RIL, originally planned to 
use 10 million running words from the beginning of Hungarian book 
printing until modern times, and now having a corpus of about 150 
million running words. The HAD was approved by the HAS as early 
as on February 28, 1984, and the undertaking was headed at that time 
by academician F. Papp. Results having been published about HFD 
gave good estimates for the number of different word-forms in larger 
texts, not known earlier.
    Naturally, during the past 20 years new opportunities emerged to 
use special purpose computer programs for morphological, syntactic 
and even semantic analysis. The linguistic work nowadays is much 
more attractive than in our "stone" age. It was instructive for me to 
reread my own article [Furedi M. Hogyan keszithetnenk ma gyakorisagi szotart? 
[How could we compile a frequency dictionary today?] // Studia Russica XII. 
Budapest, 1988. P. 442-448.], which mentioned - besides our "normal" 
text-based approach - also the individual free association method of 
building such kind of dictionaries. The first part of this article would 
have to be basically rewritten nowadays, needing to reflect new achie-
vements in linguistics, mainly in automated morphological analysis, 
developed database handling and processing of textual data, much 
improved hardware and software capabilities of personal computers.
* * *
    A frequency dictionary of all word-forms, found and 
extracted from a corpus is an intermediate step between the 
"langue" and "parole" representation of the given corpus in 
statistical terms. A "langue" representation reflects - in our opinion - 
only the lemma-frequencies (the frequencies at the level of the 
dictionary entries), while the "parole" representation is considered to 
be the corpus itself, the text under consideration. The dictionary of 
different word-forms is to be found somewhere in-between.
    For the analytic type English language a FD can be (and so was 
many times) built on the basis of only word-forms because of the lack 
of too many inflectional forms, as far as no complicated cases and 
word-forms exist in nouns and verbs. Let us consider the Czech (7 
cases for nouns), Russian (6 cases for nouns) or German (4 cases for 
nouns) languages. Different verbal forms and other parts of speech 
can be simply enumerated, too. In Russian, there are no too many 
different word-forms either for nouns to be considered (even if we 
count also the homonymic cases of second Accusative and second 
Genitive), which could cause problems to our computers even for 
larger text corpora, considering the recent development in storage and 
computing capacities, or in general, hardware computing power and 
4th generation software possibilities.
    Now let us turn our attention to the agglutinative type Hungarian 
language. 
    The famous Hungarian descriptivist L. Antal [Antal L. The 
Hungarian case system // Nyelvtudomanyi Ertekezesek № 29. Budapest, 1961. P. 
XXX.] states 17 different cases for Hungarian nouns. As an 
agglutinative language, the possessive forms are also part of the NP 
structure within the same "word". If we count also singular and plural 
forms, that is alltogether all non-recursive Hungarian noun-forms (by 
the way, some recursivity exists not only in Hungarian, but, although 
rarely, even in Russian, see: прапра.. прабабушка), than we get a 
huge number of different potential word-forms for one and the same 
Hungarian lexical unit, approximating the number 5 000.
    The Hungarian version of HunSPELL program accounts for 
4 936 different noun-forms, 4 041 adjectival forms and 59 verbal 
forms.
    Much earlier the German linguist W. Veenker [Veenker W. 
Verzeichnis der Ungarische Suffixe und Suffixkombinationen // Mitteilungen der 
Societas Uralo-Altaica. № 3. Hamburg. YEAR] counted around 3 020 different 
endings and ending-combinations.
    How this richness of different word-forms works in the real texts, 
and how is it reflected in the HFD?
    The texts tagged for the HFD (compiled from 258 text samples 
of contemporary fiction from different authors, 2 000 running words 
each) contained 508 008 running words, and the 91 471 different 
word-forms could be reduced to 33 169 lemmmas.
    For the most frequent common noun in the HFD we found 
three magnitudes less different word-forms in a half-million 
running words real texts than they exist potentially in the 
statistical population. For less frequent nouns this difference seems 
to be even more astonishing. This fact for such a big (at that time) 
Hungarian corpus was not known before 1983. This finding should be 
somewhat similar for all agglutinative languages as Finnish, Estonian, 
Mordvin, Turkish or even Japanese.
    Taking a closer look, we find that in the HFD the most frequent 
common noun "ember" meaning 'man' had only 51 different word-
forms in the tagged text samples of half a million running words, and 
one of the most frequent verb "nez" meaning "look" had 46 different 
word-forms. As we go down on the frequency list of lexemes, the 
number of different word-forms sharply decrease even for the highest 
frequency layers.
    If we would like to represent all word-forms in a statistically 
relevant way for only the most frequent Hungarian common noun 
"ember" we would need a corpus of several magnitudes higher. 
[Kornai A. How many words are there? // Glottometrics. 2002. № 4. P. 61-86. 
Without quoting his argumentation, A. Kornai states that vocabulary size V(N) tends 
to infinity as N>?.] 
    Some conclusions
    (1) For agglutinative languages the sampling method remain 
relevant, but we shall draw our attention more closely to the stems 
and develop better morphological analysis, disambiguation and lem-
matisation process. It was not a chance, why many researchers had 
chosen text samples of 2 000 or 3 000 running words with an overall 
covering of 500 000 running words (A. Juilland, A. Zampolli). For 
most quantitative linguistic purposes the exactness offered by this size 
seems to be enough, and, at the same time, the individual texts and/or 
authors do not bias the final results. Naturally, for deeper 
lexicographic description much wider samples are needed for every 
language, and we have to study and analyse more attentively the 
hapax legomena. That is why, essentially for agglutinative languages, 
sampling methods shall be used together with more intricate 
techniques, as e.g. detailed and good morphological analysis and 
tagging, being the basis of higher level (syntactical, semantic) 
analyses. Works are begun in this direction not only by Hungarian 
linguists and by the appropriate scientific institutions, but also by 
enthusiastic mathematicians and engineers at large in all over Hungary 
(e.g. see the Hungarian WordSword project at www.szoszablya.hu). 
    (2) At the same time we shall consider the widely known fact, 
how deeply genre characteristics influence the frequency results at 
all linguistic levels. In this sense the distilled Hungarian Web Corpus 
(WordSword, see www.szoszablya.hu) is not uniform, because 
inside this huge web corpus we can find scores of genres: a lot of 
descriptions (e.g. web sites of scientific institutes or universities), 
discourses (discussion fora), scientific articles (popularization of 
science) and other, more web-specific genres, to be defined later more 
precisely.
    E.g., intuitively, a discussion forum uses much wider set of 
linguistic tools, and also much more different word-forms, than a 
conference presentation or a web-published scientific article. The now 
lacking genre characteristics tagging and equal sample sizes of 
different genres would help us to compare the results in a statistically 
strict and relevant way, although the first task is not so easy to 
automate, than quickly sweeping web pages.
    
    
<object>
    In the Hungarian FD of fiction
    First X lemmas covering Y% of texts
    
    	 X			 Y%
    
    	    1			10.93
    	    5			16.62
    	  10			20.37
    	  20			25.36
    	  30			28.52
    	  40			30.83
    	  50			32.65
    	  60			34.15
    	  80			36.78
    	100			38.86
    	110			39.75
    	115			40.16
    </object>
Dr. Furedi Mihaly
KTI, Institute for Transport Sciences
Budapest, Hungary
Librarian, head of the Documentation and Information Centre of KTI
University doctorate in General Linguistics, Eotvos Lorand University, 
Budapest, Hungary
E-mail: furedi@kti.hu
 
 
 
 
4




   
9
   
